In this tutorial, we will look at the work of the Garbage Collector - the garbage collector in the Unreal Engine.
This is a special process that periodically cleans up memory. When an actor or component is destroyed,
all pointers that point to the object to be deleted and are visible in the Reflection System Unreal, that is, that
are UPROPERTY, will automatically be nullified. Let's check the work of the Garbage Collector. Let's create two pointers
in the private section of the GeometryHubActor class. One of them will be UPROPERTY, and the other will not
. Also, UPROPERTY will not have any additional qualifier parameters.
Let's declare an additional function for spawning and create its body in a .cpp file.
Let's immediately add a call to this function to BeginPlay.
Inside the function, we will create two actors and set our pointers to them.
And each frame will display information about our pointers.
The first log will refer to the pointer, which is UPROPERTY.
We will display information whether it is null or not.
And in addition, we will consider another function that is in the UObject - it is called IsValid.
In the first parameter, we pass the condition whether the PropertyActor pointer is null or not.
The second parameter is also boolean. Let's pass the return value of the IsValid
function into it. This function takes a UObject as a parameter. The function also checks the object pointer for nullptr
AND also calls the IsPendingKill function. This function returns true if and only if the
PendingKill flag is set. This flag is set to the object when we call
the Destroy function. As we will see very soon, after calling the Destroy function, the object from memory will
not be immediately deleted. Add a similar log for the second pointer, which is not a property.
Launch the editor.
Drag the GeometryHubActor class onto the stage. Set the property GeometryClass - BP_CubeGeometryActor
We will spawn the cubes. Consider an additional blueprint class called the Level Blueprint.
Each level has it. Choose Menu-> Open Level Blueprint
We are considering it purely for educational purposes, to see what it actually is. I highly do not recommend writing
code here, because many do not know about this class at all. And sometimes it can be difficult to trace
where the logic is being executed. Let's do the following thing: by pressing the enter key, we will remove all the
BaseGeometryActor type actors from the scene, for this we will use the GetAllActorsOfClass function. Specify BaseGeometryActor
in the drop-down list. The function will return an array of pointers to all found
objects of this class, so we can loop through all the elements of the array and delete each object.
That is, call the DestroyActor function. The garbage collector of the unreal engine is triggered at a specified
interval. In the code, we have the ability to force the Garbage Collector to be called.
We do this by pressing the tab key. The function is called CollectGarbage, which is a rather
time-consuming call. It is better to do this only in extreme situations when you are sure that
you need to manually invoke the garbage collector. Let's see what happens with our pointers.
We compile the blueprint, go to the stage, open the log, clear and start the game.
Two actors spawned. The console displays information that the two pointers are nonzero
and the objects are fully valid. Let's remove the actors. Click on enter. The console displays that the
pointers are nonzero, but the objects are not valid. When the Destroy function was called, the PendingToKill = true flag was set.
Therefore, the objects are not valid, but the garbage collector has not yet triggered, so the pointers are not null
. We press tab and what we see .. The pointer that we marked UPROPERTY has been reset.
This is correct behavior, and a pointer that has not been marked with UPROPERTY still points
to some area of ​​memory that is no longer valid. We are dealing with the so-called dangling pointer.
The Garbage collector did not know anything about this pointer because it was not
marked UPROPERTY. Therefore, you need to work with pointers very carefully.
We can also look at the garbage collector settings. They are located in the project settings under the garbage collector.
For example, you can change the interval for calling the garbage collector and by default it costs 1 minute.
This concludes the first section. From the next one, we begin to work with you on the
main project of the course directly . At this point I would like to make a small remark regarding the logs. In the future
, we will use the Error or Warning logging level only in those situations when we really
have some problems in our program, that is, we will not use them in terms of highlighting in the console.
This approach can be used during debugging. In production code, the logs must be
semantically correct. It also affects the automated tests of our program.
Even if the function works correctly from the point of view of logic, but, for example, there is a code with the Error log in the body,
then the unit test will be marked as not passed, because our code displayed an error log when executing the unit test.